# My family in China grappled with coronavirus - now they're worried for me in Canada

**Source:** The Toronto Star  
**URL:** https://www.thestar.com/opinion/contributors/2020/04/10/my-family-in-china-grappled-with-coronavirus-now-theyre-worried-for-me-in-canada.html  
**Date:** 6 years ago  

---

Their hiking trip was a welcome reprieve.
Late last month, my parents trekked through the lush mountain trails in their home city in southern China. It was their first outing since the Chinese government had relaxed its coronavirus lockdown. After being housebound for almost two months, they relished this moment of renewed freedom. Mom flashed a big smile for the camera, her arms spread wide and her purple scarf fluttering in the wind. Dad — always boastful of his creative workout regimen — sent me a video of his effortless finger pushups at the top of a mountain.
Barely two months ago, from the safety of Toronto, I had sent message after message to my parents back home, begging them to stay inside as the coronavirus raged across the country. Now, with cases in China dwindling and the pandemic taking hold in the West, my parents were returning the same advice. Wash your hands. Go out less. Then, they floated a drastic idea: Do you want to come home?
In a matter of weeks, the tables have turned. In our family WeChat group, my parents obsessively feed me health tips and the recent updates on confirmed infections in Canada, just when life is slowly returning to normal in China. Mom started dancing in public again and Dad recently visited his ancestral village to mark China’s tomb-sweeping festival.
Meanwhile, Toronto has fallen eerily quiet. Restaurants and bars have closed, along with the university I attend. Gone are the raucous music and parties near my residence in The Annex, where young people used to gather on Friday nights. A few weeks from completing my graduate program, I’ve been cooped up in my residence for four weeks, engrossed in news, books and Netflix. The convocation ceremonies, slated for early June, have also been cancelled.
My family once thought that my distance from China would insulate me from the pathogen wreaking havoc on lives back home. But today, as I write this op-ed in my student dorm, some 12,000 kilometres away from my hometown south of the Yangtze, the reality becomes clear: What happens in China will affect me one way or another, regardless of where I call home.
Many blame China’s authoritarian ways for failing to control the outbreak — and rightly so. Yet this view also belies the fact that democratic values did not make citizens in the West any safer. Indeed, this merciless virus knows no boundary nor political system. And the simple truth is this: Both China and the West fumbled their COVID-19 response, much to the detriment of our collective health.
Last December, when cases of patients with SARS-like symptoms first emerged in Wuhan, the Chinese authorities reprimanded a doctor who tried to sound the alarm, a misstep that allowed the pathogen to gain a tenacious hold. The doctor, Li Wenliang, later died from the coronavirus. Worse still, the outbreak coincided with the Lunar New Year travel that was underway, creating a perfect condition for the virus to spread. On Jan. 23, two days before the Chinese New Year, China sealed off Wuhan, ground zero of the coronavirus. Many more Chinese cities followed.
The ensuing weeks saw a China brought to its knees by the pathogen. Hospitals struggled to cope with a surge in infected patients. Thousands of deaths a day were reported at its peak. The economy ground to a halt. Large swaths of the population waited at home in dread.
As the West watched China succumb to the virus, it perhaps never expected the same catastrophe to come to its shores. But it did. Like a tsunami.
In a span of just two months, the coronavirus — once seen as a faraway menace — has morphed into a global threat. At the time of my writing, 94,806 people have perished around the world. An estimated 3.9 billion people — or half the world’s population — are now under lockdown. Millions have lost their jobs. The sudden onslaught of the virus has shaken humanity to its core, forcing us to rethink how we work and socialize. Health-care systems, from the U.S to Spain to Italy, have been stretched thin as governments scramble to combat a little-known virus on a relentless march.
“We’re really worried about you,” a voice message came one morning from my mom.
If only Western politicians had uttered the simple words “I’m worried,” before it was too late. Fearful of eroding their political capital, many Western leaders were too quick to offer reassurances that sometimes bordered on complacency.
In the U.S, President Trump’s repeatedly downplayed the danger, saying in February that the virus would soon disappear like a miracle. In Italy, a top health official admitted that her country initially viewed the outbreak in China as a “science-fiction movie that had nothing to do with us.” Echoing the same sentiment was the leader of an Italian ruling party, “Our economy is stronger than fear: Let’s go out for an aperitivo, a coffee or to eat a pizza,” he wrote on social media in late February. About a week later, he tested positive for coronavirus.
Similarly in Canada, health officials repeatedly reassured the public until early March that the risk posed by the coronavirus remained low. The country identified its first presumptive case on Jan. 25 and first case of community transmission on March 5. It wasn’t until 10 days later that Canada’s top health official declared the virus “a serious public health threat.”
When China enacted the lockdown measures, many in the West were skeptical, arguing that such moves would only work under authoritarian governments. In the Western press, China’s stay-at-home orders were often depicted as oppressive and cruel. Today, confronted by the fast spread of the virus, country after country in the West has followed suit, with leaders urging their citizens to stay indoors to stem the spread of the virus. Many countries have introduced bylaws to arrest and fine those who fail to comply.
My parents, like most of my family, sometimes complained to me about boredom during quarantine. But they all understood the need to endure the short-term pain to get through a crisis. Mom and Dad whiled away the hours watching TV and trying new recipes. A cousin started baking. Life under lockdown in the West may look just the same.
As we hunker down in our common fight against the monstrous virus, we’re so much more alike than we’re different. And no matter what kind of political system we live under, one thing is certain: We are all in this together.
Owen Guo is a graduating master of global affairs student at the University of Toronto’s Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy. Prior to moving to Canada in 2018, he was a researcher and writer for the New York Times in Beijing.
Error! Sorry, there was an error processing your request.
There was a problem with the recaptcha. Please try again.
You may unsubscribe at any time. By signing up, you agree to our terms of use and privacy policy. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google privacy policy and terms of service apply.
Want more of the latest from us? Sign up for more at our newsletter page.